CLAUDE/levels.md, before:

# Levels and Camera

<!-- QUICK REFERENCE
- Level files: levels/*.lua (ASCII) or Tilemaps/*.lua (Tiled export)
- ASCII geometry: # (wall), X (isolated), / \ (slopes), H (ladder), - (bridge)
- Tiled: Layer/tile type property determines collision behavior
- Entity symbols: configurable via symbols table (ASCII) or object properties (Tiled)
- Camera: Camera/init.lua with entity following
- Signs: Sign/init.lua with {action_id} variable substitution
-->

## Level Format

Levels in `levels/` use ASCII tile maps with configurable symbol definitions.

### Reserved Geometry Symbols (hardcoded)

- `#` = solid wall
- `X` = isolated tile
- `/` = right-leaning slope
- `\` = left-leaning slope
- `H` = ladder segment
- `-` = bridge (one-way platform)

### Entity Symbols (configurable per level)

Levels define a `symbols` table mapping characters to entity definitions:

```lua
return {
    map = { ... },
    symbols = {
        S = { type = "spawn" },
        R = { type = "enemy", key = "ratto" },
        W = { type = "enemy", key = "worm" },
        G = { type = "enemy", key = "spike_slug" },
    }
}
```

### Symbol Types

- `type = "spawn"` - Player spawn point (only one per level)
- `type = "enemy"` - Enemy spawn, requires `key` matching registered enemy type
- `type = "sign"` - Interactive sign, requires `text` property (supports `{action_id}` variables)

This allows levels to define custom symbols for entities without modifying the parser.

### Waypoint-Based Enemies

Some enemies use multiple markers to define patrol routes:

**Bat Eye (`bat_eye`):** Place two `B` symbols on the same row to define patrol waypoints. The enemy spawns at the left position and patrols between them.

```lua
symbols = {
    B = { type = "enemy", key = "bat_eye" },
}
```

```
-- Level map example:
B          B    -- Bat patrols horizontally between these points
#############
```

- Two markers on same row: Creates patrolling bat_eye
- Single marker: Creates stationary bat_eye
- 3+ markers on same row: Warning logged, markers ignored

## Tiled Format

The loader auto-detects Tiled exports (Lua format) via `tilesets` and `layers` arrays. Export from Tiled using File > Export As > Lua.

### Format Detection

```lua
-- Auto-detected as Tiled format if both exist:
level_data.tilesets ~= nil and level_data.layers ~= nil
```

### Layer Types

| Layer Type | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| `tilelayer` | Tile-based geometry (walls, bridges, ladders, decorative) |
| `objectgroup` | Entity placement (spawn, enemies, props, patrol areas) |
| `imagelayer` | Background images with parallax |

### Collision Type Priority

Collision behavior is determined by the `type` property:

1. **Tile type** (from tileset) - Checked first, overrides layer type
2. **Layer type** (from layer properties) - Fallback if tile has no type
3. **No type** - Tiles render as decorative (no collision)

Valid type values: `wall`, `platform`, `bridge`, `ladder`

### Object Layer Properties

Objects use custom properties for entity configuration:

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `type` | string | Entity type: `spawn`, `enemy`, `sign`, `patrol_area`, `map_transition`, `one_way_platform`, or prop type. Layer-level `type = "camera_bounds"` marks all rectangles as camera constraint zones. |
| `key` | string | Enemy key (if type=enemy), e.g., `ratto`, `zombie` |
| `text` | string | Sign text (if type=sign) |
| `flip` | bool | Face left instead of right |
| `offset_x` | number | X offset in tiles (for sprite alignment) |
| `offset_y` | number | Y offset in tiles (for sprite alignment) |

Property merging: Tileset properties are merged with object instance properties. Instance properties override tileset properties.

### Patrol Areas

Rectangle objects with `type = "patrol_area"` define patrol bounds for enemies:

1. Create a rectangle object in Tiled covering the patrol zone
2. Set custom property `type = "patrol_area"`
3. Place enemy tile objects inside the rectangle
4. Enemies automatically use the containing patrol area for waypoints

Debug: Press `P` to visualize patrol areas as yellow rectangles.

### One-Way Platforms (Tiled)

Rectangle objects with `type = "one_way_platform"` create invisible one-way colliders:

1. Create a rectangle object in Tiled at the desired platform location
2. Set custom property `type = "one_way_platform"`
3. Width determines platform length; height is ignored (uses thin 0.2 tile collider)

Use for invisible platforms or when you want one-way behavior without bridge sprites.

### Image Layer Backgrounds

Image layers support parallax scrolling and tiling:

| Property | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `parallaxx` | number | 1 | Horizontal parallax factor (0 = fixed, 1 = normal scroll) |
| `parallaxy` | number | 1 | Vertical parallax factor |
| `repeatx` | bool | false | Tile horizontally |
| `repeaty` | bool | false | Tile vertically |
| `offsetx` | number | 0 | X offset in pixels |
| `offsety` | number | 0 | Y offset in pixels |

### Camera Bounds Zones

Object layers with layer-level `type = "camera_bounds"` define constraint zones for the camera:

1. Create an object layer in Tiled
2. Set layer custom property `type = "camera_bounds"` (on the layer, not individual objects)
3. Add rectangle objects to define camera constraint areas
4. When player enters a bounds zone, camera is constrained to that area

**Behavior:**
- Camera smoothly transitions between zones (configurable lerp)
- If player exits all bounds zones, camera locks to the last active bounds (edge-locking). Falls back to world bounds only if no bounds were ever active.
- If bounds zone is smaller than viewport, camera centers on the zone

**Configuration** in `config/camera.lua`:
- `bounds_transition_duration` - Seconds of slow lerp when entering new bounds (default 0.8)
- `bounds_transition_lerp` - Lerp speed during transition (default 0.03)

### Coordinate Normalization

Tiled maps with negative coordinates (infinite maps) are automatically normalized to start at (0,0). All tile and object positions are adjusted accordingly.

### Tileset Setup

1. Create tileset in Tiled (File > New > New Tileset)
2. Set tile `type` property for collision tiles (wall, bridge, ladder)
3. Export tileset as Lua (File > Export As > Lua)
4. Place exported `.lua` file in `Tilemaps/` directory
5. **Add to registry:** Add a static require entry in `Tilemaps/registry.lua`

**Registry requirement:** Canvas uses static analysis for exports. All tilesets must be statically required in the registry—dynamic `require("Tilemaps/" .. name)` calls will break exports.

### Collection Tilesets

Tiled supports two tileset types:

| Type | Description | Rendering |
|------|-------------|-----------|
| Image-based | Single image containing all tiles (e.g., `tileset_dungeon`) | Uses `gid_to_tilemap()` to find tile coordinates |
| Collection | Individual images per tile (e.g., `decorations`) | Draws images directly with height offset |

**Detection:** Tilesets with a top-level `image` property are image-based. Collection tilesets have `image` on individual tiles instead (and `columns = 0`).

**Height Offset:** Collection tiles taller than 16px are offset upward since Tiled uses bottom-left origin:
```lua
height_offset = (tile_image.height / BASE_TILE - 1) * tile_size
```

**Typed vs Typeless Collection Tiles:**
- **Typed tiles** (wall, bridge, ladder): Use fallback sprite rendering, image not loaded
- **Typeless tiles** (decorations): Store image info, rendered via `draw_collection_tile()`

## Sign System

Interactive text displays triggered by player proximity.

### Architecture

- Object pool in `Sign/init.lua` with state in `Sign/state.lua`
- Proximity detection via bounding box overlap
- Alpha fade in/out (0.25s duration)
- Variable substitution for control bindings

### Variable Substitution

Signs support `{action_id}` placeholders replaced with bound keys/buttons:
```lua
["1"] = { type = "sign", text = "Press {jump} to jump!" }
-- Displays "Press SPACE to jump!" on keyboard
-- Displays "Press A to jump!" on gamepad
```

### Usage

```lua
Sign.new(x, y, "Press {attack} to attack!")
Sign.update(dt, player)  -- Check proximity, update fade
Sign.draw()              -- Render signs and text popups
Sign.clear()             -- Reset for level reload
```

**Level Symbol:** Configurable via `symbols` table with `type = "sign"` and `text` property.

## Camera System

Complete camera management system in `Camera/init.lua` with entity following and dynamic framing.

### Architecture

- Entity following with smooth interpolation
- State-based vertical framing (default, falling, climbing)
- Horizontal look-ahead in movement direction
- Manual look control via right analog stick
- Epsilon snapping to prevent floating-point drift

### Framing Modes

- **Default**: Player at 2/3 from top (shows more below)
- **Falling**: Player at 10% from top (uses raycast to predict landing)
- **Climbing**: Varies with direction (0.333 down, 0.5 idle)

### Key Methods

```lua
Camera.new(viewport_w, viewport_h, world_w, world_h)
Camera:set_target(target)           -- Follow an entity
Camera:set_camera_bounds(bounds)    -- Set constraint zones from level
Camera:update(tile_size, dt, lerp)  -- Call each frame
Camera:apply_transform(tile_size)   -- Apply before drawing world
Camera:get_visible_bounds(tile_size, margin) -- Get visible tile bounds
Camera:is_visible(entity, tile_size, margin) -- Check if entity is in viewport (default margin: 2 tiles)
```

### Features

- **Look-ahead**: Camera leads 3 tiles in movement direction
- **Manual Look**: Right analog stick adjusts view (0.333 to 0.833 vertical range)
- **Falling Lerp Ramp**: Camera follows fall progressively faster (0.08 -> 0.25 over 0.5s)
- **Bounds Zones**: Constrain camera to specific map regions with smooth transitions

Configuration in `config/camera.lua` (lerp speeds, framing ratios, look-ahead distance, bounds transitions).

## Key Files

- `levels/*.lua` - Level definitions with ASCII maps
- `Tilemaps/*.lua` - Tiled map exports (levels and tilesets)
- `platforms/init.lua` - Level geometry loader (format auto-detection)
- `platforms/tiled_loader.lua` - Tiled format parser
- `Sign/init.lua` - Interactive sign system
- `Sign/state.lua` - Sign state management
- `Camera/init.lua` - Camera system with following and framing
- `config/camera.lua` - Camera configuration (lerp, framing, look-ahead)

Commit message:

chore: Fix issue with one-way platforms being too close.

CLAUDE/levels.md, after:

# Levels and Camera

<!-- QUICK REFERENCE
- Level files: levels/*.lua (ASCII) or Tilemaps/*.lua (Tiled export)
- ASCII geometry: # (wall), X (isolated), / \ (slopes), H (ladder), - (bridge)
- Tiled: Layer/tile type property determines collision behavior
- Entity symbols: configurable via symbols table (ASCII) or object properties (Tiled)
- Camera: Camera/init.lua with entity following
- Signs: Sign/init.lua with {action_id} variable substitution
-->

## Level Format

Levels in `levels/` use ASCII tile maps with configurable symbol definitions.

### Reserved Geometry Symbols (hardcoded)

- `#` = solid wall
- `X` = isolated tile
- `/` = right-leaning slope
- `\` = left-leaning slope
- `H` = ladder segment
- `-` = bridge (one-way platform)

### Entity Symbols (configurable per level)

Levels define a `symbols` table mapping characters to entity definitions:

```lua
return {
    map = { ... },
    symbols = {
        S = { type = "spawn" },
        R = { type = "enemy", key = "ratto" },
        W = { type = "enemy", key = "worm" },
        G = { type = "enemy", key = "spike_slug" },
    }
}
```

### Symbol Types

- `type = "spawn"` - Player spawn point (only one per level)
- `type = "enemy"` - Enemy spawn, requires `key` matching registered enemy type
- `type = "sign"` - Interactive sign, requires `text` property (supports `{action_id}` variables)

This allows levels to define custom symbols for entities without modifying the parser.

### Waypoint-Based Enemies

Some enemies use multiple markers to define patrol routes:

**Bat Eye (`bat_eye`):** Place two `B` symbols on the same row to define patrol waypoints. The enemy spawns at the left position and patrols between them.

```lua
symbols = {
    B = { type = "enemy", key = "bat_eye" },
}
```

```
-- Level map example:
B          B    -- Bat patrols horizontally between these points
#############
```

- Two markers on same row: Creates patrolling bat_eye
- Single marker: Creates stationary bat_eye
- 3+ markers on same row: Warning logged, markers ignored

## Tiled Format

The loader auto-detects Tiled exports (Lua format) via `tilesets` and `layers` arrays. Export from Tiled using File > Export As > Lua.

### Format Detection

```lua
-- Auto-detected as Tiled format if both exist:
level_data.tilesets ~= nil and level_data.layers ~= nil
```

### Layer Types

| Layer Type | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| `tilelayer` | Tile-based geometry (walls, bridges, ladders, decorative) |
| `objectgroup` | Entity placement (spawn, enemies, props, patrol areas) |
| `imagelayer` | Background images with parallax |

### Collision Type Priority

Collision behavior is determined by the `type` property:

1. **Tile type** (from tileset) - Checked first, overrides layer type
2. **Layer type** (from layer properties) - Fallback if tile has no type
3. **No type** - Tiles render as decorative (no collision)

Valid type values: `wall`, `platform`, `bridge`, `ladder`

### Object Layer Properties

Objects use custom properties for entity configuration:

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `type` | string | Entity type: `spawn`, `enemy`, `sign`, `patrol_area`, `map_transition`, `one_way_platform`, or prop type. Layer-level `type = "camera_bounds"` marks all rectangles as camera constraint zones. |
| `key` | string | Enemy key (if type=enemy), e.g., `ratto`, `zombie` |
| `text` | string | Sign text (if type=sign) |
| `flip` | bool | Face left instead of right |
| `offset_x` | number | X offset in tiles (for sprite alignment) |
| `offset_y` | number | Y offset in tiles (for sprite alignment) |

Property merging: Tileset properties are merged with object instance properties. Instance properties override tileset properties.

### Patrol Areas

Rectangle objects with `type = "patrol_area"` define patrol bounds for enemies:

1. Create a rectangle object in Tiled covering the patrol zone
2. Set custom property `type = "patrol_area"`
3. Place enemy tile objects inside the rectangle
4. Enemies automatically use the containing patrol area for waypoints

Debug: Press `P` to visualize patrol areas as yellow rectangles.

### One-Way Platforms (Tiled)

Rectangle objects with `type = "one_way_platform"` create invisible one-way colliders:

1. Create a rectangle object in Tiled at the desired platform location
2. Set custom property `type = "one_way_platform"`
3. Width determines platform length; height is ignored (uses thin 0.2 tile collider)

Use for invisible platforms or when you want one-way behavior without bridge sprites.

### Layer Depth Ordering

Decorative tile layers are automatically sorted and split based on their depth relative to collision layers:

- **Below collision tiles**: Decorative layers with depth <= the highest collision layer depth
- **Above collision tiles**: Decorative layers with depth > the highest collision layer depth

This allows foreground decorative elements (like tree canopies, overhangs) to render in front of the player while background decorations render behind collision geometry.

The depth is determined by layer order in Tiled—later layers have higher depth values. The split is recalculated lazily when `walls.set_walls_depth()` is called.

### Image Layer Backgrounds

Image layers support parallax scrolling and tiling:

| Property | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `parallaxx` | number | 1 | Horizontal parallax factor (0 = fixed, 1 = normal scroll) |
| `parallaxy` | number | 1 | Vertical parallax factor |
| `repeatx` | bool | false | Tile horizontally |
| `repeaty` | bool | false | Tile vertically |
| `offsetx` | number | 0 | X offset in pixels |
| `offsety` | number | 0 | Y offset in pixels |

### Camera Bounds Zones

Object layers with layer-level `type = "camera_bounds"` define constraint zones for the camera:

1. Create an object layer in Tiled
2. Set layer custom property `type = "camera_bounds"` (on the layer, not individual objects)
3. Add rectangle objects to define camera constraint areas
4. When player enters a bounds zone, camera is constrained to that area

**Behavior:**
- Camera smoothly transitions between zones (configurable lerp)
- If player exits all bounds zones, camera locks to the last active bounds (edge-locking). Falls back to world bounds only if no bounds were ever active.
- If bounds zone is smaller than viewport, camera centers on the zone

**Configuration** in `config/camera.lua`:
- `bounds_transition_duration` - Seconds of slow lerp when entering new bounds (default 0.8)
- `bounds_transition_lerp` - Lerp speed during transition (default 0.03)

### Coordinate Normalization

Tiled maps with negative coordinates (infinite maps) are automatically normalized to start at (0,0). All tile and object positions are adjusted accordingly.

### Tileset Setup

1. Create tileset in Tiled (File > New > New Tileset)
2. Set tile `type` property for collision tiles (wall, bridge, ladder)
3. Export tileset as Lua (File > Export As > Lua)
4. Place exported `.lua` file in `Tilemaps/` directory
5. **Add to registry:** Add a static require entry in `Tilemaps/registry.lua`

**Registry requirement:** Canvas uses static analysis for exports. All tilesets must be statically required in the registry—dynamic `require("Tilemaps/" .. name)` calls will break exports.

### Collection Tilesets

Tiled supports two tileset types:

| Type | Description | Rendering |
|------|-------------|-----------|
| Image-based | Single image containing all tiles (e.g., `tileset_dungeon`) | Uses `gid_to_tilemap()` to find tile coordinates |
| Collection | Individual images per tile (e.g., `decorations`) | Draws images directly with height offset |

**Detection:** Tilesets with a top-level `image` property are image-based. Collection tilesets have `image` on individual tiles instead (and `columns = 0`).

**Height Offset:** Collection tiles taller than 16px are offset upward since Tiled uses bottom-left origin:
```lua
height_offset = (tile_image.height / BASE_TILE - 1) * tile_size
```

**Typed vs Typeless Collection Tiles:**
- **Typed tiles** (wall, bridge, ladder): Use fallback sprite rendering, image not loaded
- **Typeless tiles** (decorations): Store image info, rendered via `draw_collection_tile()`

## Sign System

Interactive text displays triggered by player proximity.

### Architecture

- Object pool in `Sign/init.lua` with state in `Sign/state.lua`
- Proximity detection via bounding box overlap
- Alpha fade in/out (0.25s duration)
- Variable substitution for control bindings

### Variable Substitution

Signs support `{action_id}` placeholders replaced with bound keys/buttons:
```lua
["1"] = { type = "sign", text = "Press {jump} to jump!" }
-- Displays "Press SPACE to jump!" on keyboard
-- Displays "Press A to jump!" on gamepad
```

### Usage

```lua
Sign.new(x, y, "Press {attack} to attack!")
Sign.update(dt, player)  -- Check proximity, update fade
Sign.draw()              -- Render signs and text popups
Sign.clear()             -- Reset for level reload
```

**Level Symbol:** Configurable via `symbols` table with `type = "sign"` and `text` property.

## Camera System

Complete camera management system in `Camera/init.lua` with entity following and dynamic framing.

### Architecture

- Entity following with smooth interpolation
- State-based vertical framing (default, falling, climbing)
- Horizontal look-ahead in movement direction
- Manual look control via right analog stick
- Epsilon snapping to prevent floating-point drift

### Framing Modes

- **Default**: Player at 2/3 from top (shows more below)
- **Falling**: Player at 10% from top (uses raycast to predict landing)
- **Climbing**: Varies with direction (0.333 down, 0.5 idle)

### Key Methods

```lua
Camera.new(viewport_w, viewport_h, world_w, world_h)
Camera:set_target(target)           -- Follow an entity
Camera:set_camera_bounds(bounds)    -- Set constraint zones from level
Camera:update(tile_size, dt, lerp)  -- Call each frame
Camera:apply_transform(tile_size)   -- Apply before drawing world
Camera:get_visible_bounds(tile_size, margin) -- Get visible tile bounds
Camera:is_visible(entity, tile_size, margin) -- Check if entity is in viewport (default margin: 2 tiles)
```

### Features

- **Look-ahead**: Camera leads 3 tiles in movement direction
- **Manual Look**: Right analog stick adjusts view (0.333 to 0.833 vertical range)
- **Falling Lerp Ramp**: Camera follows fall progressively faster (0.08 -> 0.25 over 0.5s)
- **Bounds Zones**: Constrain camera to specific map regions with smooth transitions

Configuration in `config/camera.lua` (lerp speeds, framing ratios, look-ahead distance, bounds transitions).

## Key Files

- `levels/*.lua` - Level definitions with ASCII maps
- `Tilemaps/*.lua` - Tiled map exports (levels and tilesets)
- `platforms/init.lua` - Level geometry loader (format auto-detection)
- `platforms/tiled_loader.lua` - Tiled format parser
- `Sign/init.lua` - Interactive sign system
- `Sign/state.lua` - Sign state management
- `Camera/init.lua` - Camera system with following and framing
- `config/camera.lua` - Camera configuration (lerp, framing, look-ahead)
